Welcome to our guide on the civil commitment
process in Utah.
This process is designed to help individuals
with severe mental illness receive the care they need,
even when they may not be able to make
that decision on their own.
Civil commitment is a legal process for individuals
with severe mental illness who require a court order
for mental health treatment in a hospital
or outpatient clinic.
The goal is to ensure their safety and the safety of others.
In Utah, there are five criteria that must be met
for an adult to be involuntarily committed.
First, the person has a mental illness
that substantially impairs their behavioral
or emotional functioning.
Second, the individual presents a substantial danger
to themselves or others.
Third, the individual is not capable
of making rational decisions.
Fourth, there is no less restrictive alternative available.
Fifth, the treatment is adequate and appropriate.
It's important to note that all five criteria must be met
for an adult to be involuntarily committed.
How do you know an individual presents a substantial danger
to themselves or others?
Substantial dangers means that due to mental illness,
an individual is at serious risk of suicide,
serious bodily injury because of their actions
or inaction, suffer serious bodily injury
because they're incapable of providing the basic necessities
of life, such as food, clothing, and shelter, causing
or attempting to cause serious bodily injury,
engaging in harmful sexual conduct.
Additionally, substantial danger means that if not treated,
suffering, severe and abnormal mental, emotional,
or physical distress that is associated
with significant impairment in judgment, reason or behavior,
and causes a substantial deterioration in the individual's
previous ability to function independently.
Most mental health services are provided voluntarily.
However, if someone is in crisis and a danger to themselves
or others and unable to make decisions
regarding their treatment emergency,
temporary commitment may be necessary.
This can happen through either a pink sheet or a blue sheet.
Both the pink sheet and a blue sheet hold a patient for up
to 72 hours, excluding holidays and weekends.
They get a person from the community to the ER
for further evaluation.
It is important to note
that there is no minimum time required for a hold
and it does not guarantee admission
to an inpatient facility.
While functionally pink
and blue sheets are the same, there are differences.
Pink sheets or emergency applications
for involuntary commitment without certification can be
signed by law enforcement or peace officers
or mental health officers.
They must observe the conduct that leads them
to believe an individual poses a substantial danger
to themselves or others.
A mental health officer is an individual designated
by a local mental health authority is qualified by training
and experience in the recognition
and identification of mental illness.
After a pink sheet is signed, then the patient needs to go
to the ER for another evaluation.
If they're going involuntarily, they'll be transported
by EMS or police.
Blue sheets or emergency application
for involuntary commitment with certification must be signed
by two different individuals.
The front side is signed by an Ian, who is anyone
with knowledge of the person's behavior.
They have observed the individual's conduct
and have firsthand knowledge
of the facts indicating mental illness and risk of injury.
This can include a family member, emergency room nurse,
or crisis worker.
The backside is signed by a medical doctor,
physician's assistant, licensed nurse practitioner,
or a designated examiner.
After the temporary whole three outcomes are possible.
One, if the patient has improved
and no longer meets civil commitment criteria,
the patient can be discharged home
or to another level of care.
Two. If the patient continues to meet civil criteria
for commitment, then you can move forward
with an application for involuntary commitment,
otherwise known as a white sheet.
Three. The patient becomes voluntary.
The patient understands the need for treatment
and is willing to stay in a hospital to get that treatment.
If the patient becomes voluntary
and then changes their mind at any point
during the hospital stay, they do have the right
to request release from an inpatient facility.
They would do this by completing a request for release form.
If the treatment team does not feel the patient is stable
for discharge, they will respond
with a denial of release form.
The denial holds the patient for up to 48 hours.
After 48 hours, the patient will be discharged
and can resume treatment as a voluntary patient
or if they need to be held longer.
An application for involuntary hold,
the white sheet would need to be filled out.
The white sheet or application for order
of involuntary commitment is signed
by an defiant on the front and an MD
or designated examiner on the back.
It must include specific information as to
how the patient meets the criteria for civil commitment.
The application needs to be filled
and signed, then sent
to the appropriate district court in your area.
Once you have submitted the white sheet
to the appropriate district court,
a hearing date will be set before the hearing.
The patient will be interviewed
by two independent designated examiners
who will review the patient's medical records.
The patient will also be assigned an
attorney at the hearing.
The judge will determine whether
or not to impose an order of commitment.
If the judge decides the commitment criteria are not met,
they can dismiss the case
and the patient will be able to leave the hospital
and return to the community.
Commitment orders are typically placed for 30,
60, or 90 days.
They do not exceed six months at the end
of the order's timeframe.
The patient must return to the court for a review hearing.
If during the order's timeframe a patient improves,
the involuntary hold may not need to continue.
If this is the case, a notice
to drop commitment proceedings form should be completed
before the review hearing
and filed with the local district court.
Once you've sent the notice of drop to the district courts,
the court is no longer involved in treatment.
The patient has improved enough.
You no longer think they need to be on an involuntary hold.
You can have them sign as a voluntary patient
and continue in the hospital receiving treatment,
or if they've improved enough as determined
by the treatment team, they can be discharged
to home or to the community.
Alternatively, during the orders timeframe,
the treatment team may decide the patient still needs
treatment but hasn't improved enough to step down
to a less restrictive setting.
In this case, a notice of transfer
and conditional release need to be filled out.
A notice of transfer explains to the court
and the next provider of care
that this patient is discharging
and identifies where they'll be
located for their next hearing.
A conditional release explains
to the patient the conditions
on which they're being released.
These are reviewed with a patient, the patient signs,
and then they're sent to the next provider of care.
If within 30 days a patient is not doing well in the
community and is refusing to comply
with mental health treatment, it can be returned
to the hospital or seen in an emergency room under an order
placement into a restricted environment without a hearing.
If they have been in the community for more than 30 days
and an order of placement into a restricted environment is
completed, then the patient can request a hearing.
Civil commitment is designed
to help understanding each step can help ensure
that individuals receive the care they need in a way
that protects their rights and safety.